All right.
So whatever trying to find concavity for a function and we do not have a graph how do we do that.
Well we can use second derivatives for that.
And let me remind you of this section of increasing and decreasing intervals because this is so similar
to that that it's worth going back to that.
So for increasing and decreasing intervals
we had that if a derivative first formed by the way the first derivative is positive
then the graph is increasing.
Then we also said that is the first derivative is negative and the graph is decreasing.
Remember this from the increasing decrease in S..
It's going to come very handy now because this is again very similar to what we're about to do
so concavity used in second derivatives.
What are the rules.
Well the rules are this.
So if the second derivative
is positive and by the way when I say plus is positive it's the same thing as saying greater than zero.
OK.
Literally the same thing.
If something is greater than zero that is positive if it's negative then it's less than zero.
Exactly the same thing.
Just again these rules say if a derivative is positive then the function is increasing.
And if the derivative is negative then the function is decreasing and that is the first derivative.
Now for concavity we use the second.
So if the second derivative is positive then the function is concave up on that interval
OK.
Now on the other hand it's the second derivative
is negative
then the function is concave down.
All right.
This is it.
And I want you to notice how similar this is to the increasing and decreasing intervals.
So for increasing and decreasing first derivative is positive it's increasing first derivative is negative
it's decreasing.
Here is the second derivative is positive.
It's concave up if the second derivative is negative it's concave down.
So they pretty much go hand-in-hand positive increasing positive concave up negative decreasing negative
concave down.
This is pretty much it.
Now there's one more analogy that we can get from the increasing and decreasing section.
So let's say that we have a max or a min
remember our max is here and there men is down here.
Remember that we said that for example if a function is increasing from left to right then it changes
and it starts decreasing when there is a max.
Right.
So it's increasing.
You get to the max and then you start decreasing in the same way if you're decreasing and then you get
to a min then you start increasing again.
See that.
So these Maxson Menz are actually the points where the function goes from increasing to decreasing and
vice versa in the same way we have points where the function goes from concave up to concave down and
from concave down to concave up and these points are called points of inflection.
I know it's a pretty ridiculous name but hey I didn't make it up.
All right.
So let's go into that now.
All right so here we have it a point of inflection is a point where the concavity of the graft changes.
So it goes from either concave up to concave down or vice versa and concave down to concave up and let's
see an example where an inflection points could be.
So let's say you have this graph.
This is the concave down part.
And then it switches to concave up right here.
And then once again it goes to concave down
and it just goes on forever.
All right
so let's hear with the concavity is this part is concave down because it opens downward then this blue
part is concave up because that opens up where it.
And finally this pink part is concave down because it opens downward again.
So we have that a point of inflection is a point where that concavity of the graph changes.
So Pink part is concave down up to about here this right here would be a point of inflection.
And do you see why.
Because a concavity is changing at that point.
All right.
By the way points of inflection are also called inflection points.
Obviously the same thing.
So I'll use both names here so that you get used to them.
All right so we were first concave down and then it became concave up right here.
Right.
So pretty much when we get to this point it stops being concave up and it starts being concave down
again.
So this point here and what the market likes is a point there is and we'll use the alternative name
which is kind of the same thing.
Inflection points.
So let me repeat it just like we have Max and mennes where the graph goes from increasing to decreasing
and vice versa.
We have inflection points where the graph goes from concave down to concave up and from concave up to
concave down.
Now do you remember the increasing and decreasing sections where we had to check for the signs to the
left of a critical number and to the right of a critical number.
And then if the signs were different then that means you had a max or a min for concavity it's going
to be exactly the same thing.
So again concavity is very very very similar to the increasing and decreasing interval section.
The only difference is that instead of using the first derivative we use now the second derivative.
So let's go into the process of finding concavity for a function.
Here's the really easy process for finding a cavity.
So let's say you have a function f of x.
The first thing you're going to do is to find concavity is find the second derivative.
Notice it has two primes.
That means second derivatives.
Then remember how for increasing and decreasing intervals we had to find the critical numbers for the
first derivative.
Well here we find the critical numbers and I put this in quotes because critical numbers typically referred
to the first derivative.
But here we're finding sort of like the critical numbers for the second derivative.
So remember that that means that we need to find the numbers that make the second derivative either
equal to zero.
Or on find.
All right.
And then once we have those numbers remember we have to classify the intervals on point of inflection.
So just like we did in increasing and decreasing intervals we need to test for values to the left of
those critical numbers and to the right of the critical numbers.
And like I showed you before if for example the second derivative is positive to the left of a critical
number.
That means that it is concave up to the left of that critical number.
And if for example if the second derivative is negative to the rights of a critical number that means
that the function is concave down on that interval.
So that way we can actually classify the intervals where it is concave up and the intervals where it
is concave down and the last thing is points of inflection to remember inflection points are the point
where the concavity changes.
So for example if we know that the concavity is up to the left of a number and then down to the right
of that same number the concavity went from concave up to concave down if the concavity changed.
That means we have a point of inflection at that point.
So we've talked a lot.
Let's go straight into an example and let's find concavity and point of inflection for a function.